213Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads
DINGHENG MO, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
FANCHAO CHEN∗,Fudan University, China
SIQIANG LUO†,Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
CAIHUA SHAN, Microsoft Research Asia, China
LSM-trees are widely adopted as the storage backends of key-value stores. However, optimizing the system
performance under dynamic workloads has not been sufficiently studied in previous work. To fill the gap, we
present RusKey , a key-value store with the following new features: (1) RusKey is a first attempt to design
LSM-tree structures online to enable robust performance under the context of dynamic workloads; (2) RusKey
is the first study to use Reinforcement Learning (RL) to guide LSM-tree transformations; (3) RusKey includes
a new LSM-tree design, named FLSM-tree , that facilitates efficient transitions between different compaction
policies, which addresses the key bottleneck for dynamic key-value stores. We justify the superiority of the new
design with theoretical analysis; (4) RusKey requires no prior workload knowledge for system adjustment, in
contrast to state-of-the-art techniques. Experiments show that RusKey exhibits strong performance robustness
across diverse workloads, achieving up to 4x better end-to-end performance than the RocksDB system under
various settings.
CCS Concepts: •Information systems →Data management systems ;•Theory of computation →
Data structures design and analysis .
Additional Key Words and Phrases: LSM-tree, key-value stores, compaction policy, system design, reinforce-
ment learning
ACM Reference Format:
Dingheng Mo, Fanchao Chen, Siqiang Luo, and Caihua Shan. 2023. Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards
A Reinforcement Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads. Proc. ACM Manag. Data 1, 3
(SIGMOD), Article 213 (September 2023), 25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3617333
1 INTRODUCTION
Log-structured-merge-trees (LSM-trees) are widely adopted as the backbones of mainstream key-
value stores, such as LevelDB [ 24] at Google, RocksDB [ 21] at Facebook, Cassandra [ 31] at Apache,
Voldemort [ 35] at LinkedIn, and WiredTiger [ 13] at MongoDB. An LSM-tree stores data as key-value
entries, offering efficient entry updates and key lookups. It organizes the data into multiple levels
with exponentially increasing capacities. The data in each level is organized into sorted runs. An
LSM-tree appends the new key-value entry into the main memory buffer, whose filled-up will
∗Work done when the author was working as a research assistant under the supervision of Siqiang Luo.
†Siqiang Luo is the corresponding author.
Authors’ addresses: Dingheng Mo, Nanyang Technological University, , Singapore, ; Fanchao Chen, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China, ; Siqiang Luo, Nanyang Technological University, , Singapore, ; Caihua Shan, Microsoft Research Asia,
Beijing, China, .
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
2836-6573/2023/9-ART213
https://doi.org/10.1145/3617333
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:2 Dingheng Mo et al.
sort the buffered entries and compact them as a larger sorted run merged into the next level. The
process can cascade down whenever the affected level reaches its capacity. The compaction policy
in a level determines how frequently the level compacts its data.
In LSM-tree based key-value stores, one important topic is to handle dynamically changing
workloads. As demonstrated by prior studies (e.g., [ 6,14,22,40]), workloads for real-world applica-
tions are dynamically changing with daily patterns and shifts, which underscores the necessity
of processing various portions of key lookups and entry updates. For example, Cao et al. [10]
collected a trace of 14-day operations processed by UDB [ 5], which is a database storing Facebook’s
social graph data. They concluded that the numbers and portions of queries and updates vary
significantly over time. This is not surprising as modern databases have billions of users who are
actively accessing or updating database applications in different time spans. Therefore, in this paper
we focus on designing an LSM-tree key-value store that can process dynamic workloads with high
performance.
1.1 Prior Work
There has been fast development on LSM-tree optimizations. Behind the ingenuity of an optimized
LSM-tree often we see an elaborate design of its key components. Examples include optimizing
compaction policies [ 12,17,18,26,27,48], developing update-friendly compaction schemes [ 3,20,
47,49,59,61,62], enhancing Bloom filters [ 16,19,33,44,67,68], enhancing range filters [ 29,39,63],
adopting unconventional hardwares [ 2,25,54,57,58,66], narrowing the gap between LSM-trees and
update-in-place designs [ 53], separating keys and values [ 11,36], keeping hot entries in the buffer
and selective flushing [ 7], improving concurrency [ 23,50], reducing tail latency [ 8,37,49], improving
memory management mechanisms [ 9,28,38], and exploiting data characteristics [ 1,46,60]. These
works offer promising improvement in various aspects.
Most of the works [ 1–4,7–9,11,16,19,20,23,25,28,29,36–39,46,47,49,50,54,57–60,63,66–68],
unfortunately, are not from the angle of optimizations under dynamic workloads, because their
designs are not workload-aware. Recent studies working towards workload-aware LSM-trees lie in
tuning the compaction policy [12,17,18,26,27]. Compaction improves the read efficiency in an
LSM-tree because it reduces the sorted runs to be probed in each query and cuts down space by
eliminating redundant entries. However, compaction itself is a costly process that affects write
efficiency. The more aggressive in compaction, the lower read amplification and the higher write
amplification. Based on these observations, Dayan and Idreos [ 17] further point out that a more
frequent compaction optimizes the lookup cost but increases the update cost, and hence, various
customized compaction policies based on workload characteristics are proposed to improve the
overall performance of the LSM-tree.
There are still several deficiencies in these closest works when applied to dynamic workloads.
Most of them [ 12,17,27] compute an optimized system setting when given a specific application
workload. For example, Cosine [ 12] and Dostoevisky [ 17] require users to input a workload with a
specific ratio between lookups and updates, so that they can model the expected performance of
various possible compaction policies, and choose the best one. While these models are very promis-
ing in analyzing a workload-aware system, it remains open regarding how to design reasonable
key-value stores when the workload is not known a priori. One possibility is to combine them with
workload forecasters such as those designed by Ma et al. [40], but this incurs an additional forecaster
training cost. More importantly, even though the additional workload forecaster may be integrated,
the obstacle is in efficient adaptation of the underlying LSM-tree from one state to another in
response to workload changes – the main bottleneck of designing dynamic LSM-trees. For example,
changing a compaction policy at a level usually requires resizing the runs and remapping each
data block to the runs, which incurs a high cost. This issue has been largely overlooked in the
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:3
literature and the only known strategy is a greedy transition mentioned by Dayan and Idreos [ 17]
as an extended discussion. Nonetheless, this strategy is sub-optimal as we discuss in Section 4.3.
1.2 The Problem and Our Solution
We aim to design an LSM-tree based key-value store that can automatically adapt itself in an online
manner to continuously changing workloads while keeping a robust end-to-end performance
(i.e., close to the performance of the optimal setting in the hindsight). In contrast to prior works
on autonomous DBMS, our focus on NoSQL key-value stores (particularly, LSM-trees) brings in
drastically different technical challenges. We thus explore new ways of modeling key-value stores
so as to achieve our goal. Below we give a preview of our new ideas.
Modeling Key-Value Stores Using Reinforcement Learning. We model (See Section 3 and
Section 5) the LSM-tree based key-value store as a reinforcement learning process [ 51,52], which
is a machine learning approach that trains a model with an action-reward series in an online
manner. We remark that most existing methods for tuning compaction policy [ 12,17,18,26,27]
use a different way in modeling, which captures the relationship between compaction policy and
LSM-tree performance via a sophisticated formula, referred to as a white-box cost model. While
these models show promising results in many aspects, there are limitations in modeling the end-
to-end system performance. First, white-box models often focus on I/O complexity analysis to
predict the I/Os incurred by each lookup or update, neglecting the CPU overheads that can be
significant. For example, Zhu et al. [68] reported that the hashing of Bloom filters in LSM-trees
may incur high CPU overhead that even exceeds I/O overhead with modern storage hardware.
Neglecting the CPU overhead is therefore a source of inaccuracy. Second, modern systems are
extremely sophisticated in design, and are often cumbersome, if not unpromising, to be unfolded for
detailed complexity analysis of internal components. For example, memory cache can significantly
affect the performance, but white-box formulas are often unable to model such bottom-level details.
In contrast to white-box formula based models, models based on RL for tuning treat the system
as a black-box, where action modifies the LSM-tree compaction policies and reward traces system
performance. The tuning is automatic in a machine-learning style. Modeling the process with RL is
not trivial, as discussed in Section 5.
It is also important to note that we do not aim to completely replace classic white-box models
which are still helpful in many aspects. Instead, our main purpose is to explore the potential of
applying RL in tuning LSM-tree based systems, which complements the existing classic methods
and, possibly, opens the new research direction for machine-learning-based LSM-tree tuning.
Designing Transition-Friendly LSM-trees for Reinforcement Learning. When dynamically
tuning LSM-trees, one critical issue is maintaining an efficient transformation of LSM-trees, as
a slow transformation may outweigh the benefit of a compaction policy adjustment. This issue
motivates us to design FLSM-tree (See Section 4), a flexible LSM-tree that allows various-sized
runs in a level. When the compaction policy changes, FLSM-tree avoids the modification of most
of the data in the affected level. We also provide a theoretical analysis showing that FLSM-tree
promises zero delay, free immediate transition costs, as well as less implicit additional costs.
Integrating White-box Models in Reinforcement Learning. Unlike RL in other typical machine
learning scenarios, it is unpromising to gather a large amount of training samples in a key-value store
because the samples are obtained by running costly lookup and update operations. To circumvent
the problem, we propose a new level-based training strategy, where the compaction policies of
smaller levels are learned by RL while those of large levels are extended by the lower-level policies
through a careful complexity analysis (i.e., a white-box model). This technique largely reduces the
number of samples needed to train the model, empowering the tuning ability of RL.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:4 Dingheng Mo et al.
Putting together, we develop the RusKey system, a flexible LSM-tree-based key-value storage
system that is self-adaptive to dynamic workloads. We summarize our contributions as follows.
•We make the first attempt at designing RL models to optimize the performance of LSM-tree
based key-value systems. We design and implement RusKey which is a key-value system that
demonstrates strong robustness in end-to-end performance via an RL-based tuning model. RusKey
can efficiently adapt itself to various workloads, based on the instructions of the learning model.
•We address an open problem in dynamic key-value systems – the efficient and transient policy
transformation in LSM-tree under dynamic workloads. We present FLSM-tree , a novel LSM-
tree structure that incorporates a flexible compaction policy transition scheme, which swiftly
transforms the compaction policy of an LSM-tree with minor additional overhead.
•We present a new level-based RL model which is embedded with a policy propagation formula to
reduce the number of samples required, shrink the action space and improve the convergence
speed in our RusKey system.
•We conduct extensive experimental evaluations of RusKey in real system environments. We
demonstrate that RusKey achieves high performance in all the tested workloads. RusKey achieves
up to 4x throughput compared with the baselines.
2 BACKGROUND
LSM-tree. The log-structured merge tree (LSM-tree) [ 42] is a persistent multi-level index structure
that stores key-value entries. When a key-value entry is inserted, an LSM-tree buffers it in the
main memory. Once the buffer is filled up, it sorts the entries by keys and flushes them into a
disk-resident sorted run in Level 1. When the size of the disk runs in a level exceeds a certain
threshold, the LSM-tree sort-merges them into a larger run and puts it into the next level. This
process of sort-merging multiple smaller sorted runs in Level 𝑖to a larger sorted run in Level 𝑖+1
is called compaction . As such, the capacity of Level 𝑖+1is𝑇times larger than that of Level 𝑖, where
𝑇is the capacity ratio.
Lookup (Query) in LSM-tree. In modern key-value systems, LSM-tree is coupled with Bloom
filters and fence pointers to improve the key lookup performance. The Bloom filter and fence
pointer are built for each sorted run and will be loaded into the main memory when the system
starts. To check whether a key exists in a run, the Bloom filter associated with the run is first
probed. If it returns false, then the run does not contain the key and no I/O cost will be incurred.
Otherwise, accessing the run in the disk is necessary, which incurs 𝑂(1)I/Os guaranteed by fence
pointers. In general, the Bloom filter largely prevents unnecessary disk reads. The I/O-cost reduced
Notation Description
𝑇 Capacity ratio between adjacent levels
𝐾𝑖 Compaction policy of the 𝑖-th level
𝐸 Size of a key-value entry (in bytes)
𝐵 Size of a disk page (in bytes)
𝐶𝑖 Capacity of the 𝑖-th level (in bytes)
𝑓𝑖 False positive rate of Bloom filters at the 𝑖-th level
𝐷𝑖 Total data size in the 𝑖-th level (in bytes)
Table 1. Frequently used notations.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:5
by the Bloom filter depends on its FPR (False-Positive Rate). In particular, if the run does not
contain the queried key, its Bloom filter may still mistakenly return true for the key, incurring a
false positive. While mainstream designs uniformly set the FPRs for Bloom filters at all LSM-tree
levels, state-of-the-art techniques [ 12,16–18,26] employ the Monkey allocation scheme [ 16], which
arranges exponentially higher FPRs to Bloom filters in larger levels.
Compaction Policy. The compaction policy 𝐾𝑖at each Level 𝑖can be independent, as presented
in Dostoevsky [ 17]. The policy 𝐾𝑖means that there are at most 𝐾𝑖sorted runs in the level. Level 𝑖
has an active run that admits the merged run from Level 𝑖−1. The capacity for each active run is
1/𝐾𝑖of the level capacity. All entries in a level are eventually merged and flushed down to the next
level when the level reaches its capacity. Dostoevsky proposes Lazy-Leveling which applies an
aggressive compaction policy of at most 1 sorted run in the largest level while all other levels use a
lazy compaction policy in common. They give a way of applying different compaction policies at
different levels, but within the same level the compaction policy is always the same. Our framework
give a significant extension by allowing various run sizes in a level.
Amplification. Read amplification and write amplification are commonly used to measure the
performance of an LSM-tree. Read amplification refers to the average number of disk pages read
during a lookup, since a query may probe multiple sorted runs in an LSM-tree to search for the
queried key. Write amplification refers to the average number of physical rewrites that an entry
incurs, because each data entry is constantly rewritten to storage as a result of the LSM-tree’s
compaction.
3RUSKEY OVERVIEW
This section presents RusKey , a key-value system empowered with deep reinforcement learning.
The purpose of RusKey is to tune the compaction policy in each LSM-tree level to best process
the workload. There is no doubt that a fixed policy is still possible to be applied under dynamic
workloads, but as we have mentioned, changing policies can bring in benefits as long as the LSM-
tree structure transformation cost is small. RusKey includes two major designs: (1) A level-based
deep reinforcement learning tuning model, named Lerp and (2) A new flexible LSM-tree with new
compaction transition method, named FLSM-tree . As we will explain shortly, Lerp incorporates
the cost analysis across levels for fast convergence and less sample-demanding training. FLSM-
tree embeds flexible transition to avoid high transition cost, hence being more cost-friendly to
a compaction policy tuner like Lerp . We will first describe the general workload of RusKey in
this section, and then discuss the detailed mechanism of FLSM-tree andLerp in Section 4 and
Section 5. Table 1 lists the frequently used notations.
3.1 System Workflow
InRusKey , the application workload is a series of lookups orentry updates operations input to the
database. A lookup finds the corresponding value for a given key, and an update inserts or deletes a
key-value entry. RusKey allows for arbitrary arrivals of operations, which means that knowledge of
the query/update ratio is not known in advance. A mission inRusKey is a collection of operations
(e.g., lookups or updates) in the workload. Conceptually, the workload is divided into missions.
After processing each mission, RusKey may adjust its internal LSM-tree structure for the coming
missions. RusKey also maintains a statistics collector that keeps track of necessary statistics of
RusKey and application workload over time. Besides overall statistics of the FLSM-tree , it tracks
statistics separately for each FLSM-tree level to support the level-based training scheme in Lerp .
It also collects the operation composition in each mission for detecting changes in the application
workload.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:6 Dingheng Mo et al.
Get State & RewardStore
Application Workload
Missions
Missions
MissionsMissionFLSM-tree Based Database LERP Model 
Process
… Level213LFLSM-TreeStats CollectorComposition
Level stats
CriticActorEnd-to-end statsCurrent state
Tuning strategyReplayBuffer
FlexibleTransitionKKK’KKK
Current stateTuning strategyNext StateRewardEnd-to-end latencyLevel latency
Sample &Update
UpdateLookupsUpdates
Fig. 1. The components and workflow of RusKey .
FLSM-tree Write-heavy Workload 
90% updates, 10% lookups 
By default 
K = 1, T = 10 FLSM-tree Write-heavy Workload 
90% updates, 10% lookups 
Self-tuned to K = 10, 
which is write-optimized RusKey RusKey 
FLSM-tree Balanced Workload 
50% updates, 50% lookups 
Self-tuned to K = 3, 
good on both read&write RusKey 
FLSM-tree Read-heavy Workload 
10% updates, 90% lookups 
Self-tuned to K = 1, 
which is read-optimized RusKey Workload shift Workload shift Initial State 
K = 1 K = 10 K = 3 K = 1 
Fig. 2. Running example of RusKey . This is a simplified example where we assume that each level has the
same compaction policy. In fact, RusKey allows the FLSM-tree to set various compaction policies across
different levels.
Figure 1 illustrates the workflow of RusKey . Suppose a real-world application employs RusKey
as its data storage backend. RusKey processes operations from the application workload with the
FLSM-tree and uses the tuning model Lerp to adjust the compaction policy. Lerp andFLSM-tree
interact after each mission. At the end of a mission, Lerp gives tuning suggestions to the FLSM-tree
and updates the actor-critic network. Meanwhile, the statistics collector sends statistics of FLSM-
tree in this mission to Lerp , which extracts experience samples from the statistics and stores them
in the replay buffer. The replay buffer stores some quadruples (called experience samples), each
of which contains the essential information for reinforcement training. The information includes
the action of policy change, the FLSM-tree state before the action, the FLSM-tree state after the
action, and the subsequent mission, as well as the reward of the action. Through learning from
these samples, Lerp effectively updates its internal actor-critic network [ 34]. Then Lerp selects a
suitable tuning strategy for the compaction policy of the FLSM-tree in the next mission according
to the current state of the FLSM-tree .RusKey then updates the FLSM-tree based on the suggested
compaction policy with the flexible transition. Under a stable application workload, the actor-critic
network converges in a number of missions, shifting FLSM-tree towards the optimal compaction
policy. Once the application workload changes, the actor-critic network is no longer in convergence,
andLerp will restart to exploit compaction policies under the new workload.
Running Example. Figure 2 shows a running example of RusKey , which is simplified by assuming
each level has the same compaction policy. Initially, the compaction policy is set as 1, and the
capacity ratio is 10. The dynamic workload is write-heavy at first with 90% of updates and 10% of
lookups. It then shifts into a read-write-balanced workload (50% of updates and 50% of lookups),
followed by a read-heavy workload (10% of updates and 90% of lookups). At the beginning, RusKey
tunes the compaction policy of the FLSM-tree from𝐾=1to𝐾=10to achieve the best write
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:7
performance under write-heavy workloads, and we note that during the tuning the system is
not fed with the workload statistics. With the benefit of flexible transition, the FLSM-tree could
transform its policy 𝐾=1to𝐾=10without a transition cost and delay. Once the workload shifts
to the balanced one, RusKey will re-tune the compaction policy of the FLSM-tree from𝐾=10
to𝐾=3, which is more effective in a balanced workload. Similarly, when the workload shifts to
read-heavy, RusKey will adjust its compaction policy from 𝐾=3to𝐾=1to achieve an optimized
read efficiency.
4FLSM-TREE INRUSKEY
This section discusses two baseline transition methods (Section 4.1), followed by presenting our
design of FLSM-tree (Section 4.2) and its desired properties (Section 4.3).
4.1 Greedy and Lazy Transitions
RusKey changes the underlying LSM-tree based on the suggested compaction policy by the tuning
model. However, in the classic LSM-tree, continuously changing the compaction policy demands
the reallocation of memory and potentially reorganizes the data in the LSM-tree. Enforcing a change
of compaction policy at a level can have two straightforward solutions, namely, greedy transition
andlazy transition . However, these solutions are not ideal.
Greedy Transition [ 17].Once a level receives a tuning strategy, it merges and flushes all its
data into its next level. The current level then needs to be rebuilt based on the new compaction
policy, as shown in Figure 3 (top). We note that such a greedy transition is not effective due to its
dreadful cost and the write stall incurred during data flush, and hence significantly degrades the
performance. Moreover, if an unfilled level is merged with the next level, it incurs a larger write
amplification than an LSM-tree without transitions.
Lazy Transition. The other extreme is the lazy transition that an LSM-tree level changes its
compaction policy only after it is merged to the next level, as shown in Figure 3 (bottom). Although
such a lazy transition will not bring an immediate compaction cost, it affects the timeliness of the
information fed into the RL model. To explain, a given (policy change) action may have no effect
on the LSM-tree level until the level eventually becomes full and gets merged, and the delay can be
long at a large level, ultimately reducing the effectiveness of the model.
4.2 Main Design of FLSM-tree
We design a Flexible LSM -tree, abbreviated as FLSM-tree , to accommodate a flexible transition
between compaction policies. A novel design in FLSM-tree is that it allows different-sized runs
to exist at the same level. This extends the classic LSM-tree structure, allowing more room for an
LSM-tree to morph the structure gradually. At each level, there is an active run that can admit
Fig. 3. Greedy and lazy transitions of compaction policy.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:8 Dingheng Mo et al.
(A) Original LSM-tree 
1 Level 
2
36000  Policy: 2 Runs  
Policy: 1 Run  
Policy: 6 Runs  … … (B) Transform Policy at Level 3 to 10 
6000  Policy: 2 Runs  
Policy: 1 Run  
New Policy: 10 Runs  … … (C) Transform Policy at Level 3 to 3 
6000  Policy: 2 Runs  
Policy: 1 Run  
New Policy: 3 Runs  … … 1000 1000 1000 600 2000 2000 
Fig. 4. Flexible compaction policy transition in a FLSM-tree.
Transition Alg. Greedy Lazy FLSM-tree (ours)
Transition Cost𝐶
2𝐵0 0
Delay (secs) 0𝐶
2𝑁𝑢𝐸0
Additional
Cost𝐾<𝐾′𝑇𝐶(1−𝑥)
2𝐵𝐾𝑇𝐶(1−𝑥)(𝐾′−𝐾)
2𝐵𝐾𝐾′ 0
𝐾>𝐾′𝑇𝐶(1−𝑥)
2𝐵𝐾𝑓𝐶(1−𝑥2)(𝐾−𝐾′)𝛾
2𝐸(1−𝛾)𝑓𝐶(𝑥−𝑥2)(𝐾−𝐾′)𝛾
𝐸(1−𝛾)
Case Study 125I/Os 3.75I/Os 2.5I/Os
Table 2. Transition costs and delays.
Level read amplification 
D / C 1K
xSlope = f·KLazy transition 
Flexible transition Transform 
from K to K’ 
Slope = f·K’
Before transition After transition Area 2 Area 1 Fig. 5. Flexible transition incurs an additional cost =
Area 2; lazy transition incurs an additional cost = Area
1 + Area 2.
more key-value entries. When the active run in the level reaches its capacity, it is sealed, and a new
active run is created. When a new policy is applied on a level, it never affects the runs that have
been sealed, and only changes the capacity of the active run and the runs to be formed later. In this
way, the change of the policy is immediate and the Lerp model gets the correct reward by applying
the policy changes without incurring any immediate transition costs.
Let the capacity of Level 𝑖be𝐶𝑖, the new compaction policy be 𝐾′
𝑖, and the original compaction
policy of Level 𝑖is𝐾𝑖. The discussion is divided into two cases.
If𝑲′
𝒊<𝑲𝒊,FLSM-tree will increase the capacity of the active run, keeping the other runs intact.
If𝑲′
𝒊>𝑲𝒊,FLSM-tree will decrease the capacity of the active run. One may have a concern
that when the new policy is known, the active run size can already be larger than the expected
size𝐶𝑖/𝐾′
𝑖. In this case, we immediately seal the active run and create a new active run. The runs,
when sealed, remain untouched until the level holding them reaches its capacity and triggers a
compaction during which all runs will be merged to the next level.
Example. Figure 4 presents examples of transforming compaction policy in FLSM-tree . A grey
square represents a sorted run filled with data, and the dashed line denotes logical capacity of a
level or an incoming run. In Figure 4 (A), the compaction policy of Level 1 is 2. Level 1 includes
two runs, each having a size that is half of the level capacity. The compaction policy of Level 2 is 1,
rendering a single run in the level. For Level 3, initially the compaction policy is 6 and the level
capacity is 6000, giving an expected run size 6000/6=1000. If we transform the policy of Level 3 to
10, it will turn to the state of Figure 4 (B), such that the expected run size under the new compaction
policy would not affect existing sealed runs, but the expected size of an incoming run decreases to
600 (=6000/10). If we transform the policy to 3, it will turn to the state of Figure 4 (C). The expected
size of an incoming run becomes 6000/3=2000, and the current active run size also increases to
2000.
4.3 Desired Properties of FLSM-tree
To check the advantages of our FLSM-tree design, we focus on the following measures: (1) Transition
Cost, which is the immediate compaction cost incurred by a transition. We aim at small immediate
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:9
transition cost to avoid serious performance glitches; (2) Delay , which is the time span between the
new policy’s arriving at the system and the time at which the transition actually takes effect on
the LSM-tree; (3) Additional Cost , which is the total additional I/O cost incurred by a transition, as
compared to an ideal LSM-tree born with the new compaction policy.
We illustrate the concept of additional cost incurred by transition using Figure 4 (C) as an
example. After transforming the policy in Level 3 from 6 to 3, the incoming runs will follow the
new compaction policy 3, while the existing sealed runs stay with the previous compaction policy
6. In this instance, there will be at most 4 runs in Level 3 after the flexible transition, whereas the
new compaction policy indicates 3 runs in the level, such that accessing the level would incur more
I/Os than expected. Here we only discuss the additional cost, and hence the cost is lower bounded
by0. We note that sometimes additional benefits may be involved, for which we will have a further
discussion in the overall comparison paragraph at the end of this section.
Notations. To facilitate our discussion, we first introduce the necessary notations for the analysis
in this sub-section. We fix an LSM-tree level whose capacity (in bytes) is 𝐶. Let𝐷be the total data
amount (in bytes) of key-value entries currently stored in the level. Let 𝐵be the size (in bytes) of a
disk page. Let 𝐸be the size (in bytes) of a key-value entry. Let 𝑁𝑢be the number of updates arriving
per second. Let 𝑥be the percentage of the stored data in the current level when a compaction policy
transition is applied. Let 𝑓be the FPR of the Bloom filter in the level. Let 𝛾denote the percentage
of lookups in the workload.
FLSM-tree incurs zero transition cost and delay. OurFLSM-tree has the minimum transition
cost and delay cost. The greedy transition merges all data in that level to the next level. This process
incurs𝐷
𝐵I/Os. When a transition occurs, 𝐷may be any random value between 0and𝐶, leading to
an amortized I/O cost𝐶
2𝐵for a greedy transition. In contrast, the transition cost of a lazy transition
is always zero. As for the delay, in the lazy transition, the new compaction policy takes effect only
after the level is full and a whole-level compaction is triggered. The delay can be estimated by
𝐶−𝐷
𝑁𝑢𝐸seconds. The amortized delay of the lazy transition is𝐶
2𝑁𝑢𝐸considering 𝐷ranges from 0to𝐶.
Regarding the transition mechanism in a FLSM-tree , the transition cost is always zero, since it only
changes the metadata of the active run and does not incur any disk reads. Meanwhile, the flexible
transition in a FLSM-tree comes into effect immediately with zero delay1. Table 2 summarizes the
transition cost and delay of the three transition methods.
FLSM-tree incurs less additional cost. FLSM-tree also incurs the minimum additional costs
compared with baselines. We first examine the additional cost of each transition method.
Additional cost of the greedy transition. A greedy transition compacts the level right after the pol-
icy transition, giving zero additional read cost. However, this compaction suffers a larger write
amplification because it merges fewer data into the next level than a normal full-level compaction.
We now analyze the additional write amplification incurred by a greedy transition. Let us first
consider a normal compaction without policy changes. Without loss of generality, we assume that
the subsequent level’s compaction policy is 𝐾. In expectation, the size of the active run in the
subsequent level is𝑇𝐶
2𝐾. A compaction reads expected𝑇𝐶
2𝐾bytes of data and rewrites them into the
disk in order to merge 𝐶bytes of data (i.e., the full current level) into the subsequent level. Hence,
the active run size𝑇𝐶
2𝐾divided by𝐶, which is𝑇
2𝐾, is the write amplification of the current level. The
additional cost caused by the greedy transition is𝑇
2𝐾·𝑥because it only merges data that is 𝑥times
the level capacity, which leads to𝑇
2𝐾·𝑥−𝑇
2𝐾additional write amplifications.
1Zero-delay means the LSM-tree immediately reacts when policy changes, marking that upcoming updates will follow the
new policy. We note that the policy changes will not have any effect for the extreme case where the workload only contains
reads. In this case, flexible transition simply degenerates into lazy transition and will not bring additional negative impact.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:10 Dingheng Mo et al.
The expected additional I/O cost is computed by multiplying the additional write amplification
with the number of pages merged by the greedy transition into the subsequent level:
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑦 =𝑇
2𝐾·𝑥−𝑇
2𝐾
·𝐶·𝑥
𝐵=𝑇𝐶(1−𝑥)
2𝐵𝐾(1)
Additional cost of lazy transition. If𝐾>𝐾′, lazy transition avoids the immediate transition cost
and the additional cost from write amplification, at the expense of incurring additional read cost.
We illustrate this expense in Figure 5, where the horizontal-axis refers to the level’s filling ratio,
which is the percentage of data stored at the level among the capacity of the level, i.e., 𝐷/𝐶. The
vertical-axis refers to the read amplification of the level, which is the expected number of disk
pages a lookup needs to probe in the level. In a process of inserting data from an empty level to a
full level, the filling ratio increases from 0to1. In expectation, the read amplification of a level is
the product of three values – its false positive rate 𝑓, its compaction policy 𝐾, and its filling ratio.
To explain, when the level is full, there are 𝐾runs in the level to be probed during each query and
each run probe requires a disk I/O only when its Bloom filter returns positive. Therefore, the read
amplification can be expressed by 𝑓·𝐾·𝐷
𝐶.
As shown in Figure 5, after the transition, the read amplification of the level is higher than it
should be under the more aggressive compaction policy 𝐾′(which is represented by the dotted line).
This is because the level still adheres to the foregoing 𝐾compaction policy with lazy transition. This
lasts until the level is full, at which point all data is merged into the following level via compaction.
Therefore, the sum of Area 1 and Area 2 in Figure 5 represents the overall additional read cost of a
lazy transition. A lazy transition’s additional cost in I/Os can be expressed by Equation 2.
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑙𝑎𝑧𝑦=𝑓𝐶(1−𝑥2)(𝐾−𝐾′)𝛾
2𝐸(1−𝛾)(2)
If𝐾<𝐾′, a lazy transition incurs an additional write cost. Upon changing the policy, the expected
write amplification for this level becomes𝑇
2𝐾′. However, until the level becomes full and triggers
compaction, the actual write amplification of the lazy transition remains𝑇
2𝐾. Throughout this
period, this level will merge a total of(1−𝑥)𝐶
𝐵blocks, incurring an additional cost of𝑇𝐶(1−𝑥)(𝐾′−𝐾)
2𝐵𝐾𝐾′ .
Additional cost of a flexible transition. The additional cost of a flexible transition can be derived
in a similar way to a lazy transition. Before changing a compaction policy, the growth rate of
read amplification equals the current compaction policy 𝐾. When a new compaction policy 𝐾′is
applied, different transition methods bring in distinctions. With a lazy transition, the growth rate
of read amplification stays the same after the change of the policy. With a flexible transition, the
growth rate reduces from 𝑓·𝐾to𝑓·𝐾′. Similar to a lazy transition, a flexible transition also incurs
additional read amplification when the level is full. This is because part of the data in this level is
inserted before the transition, where the inserted data adheres to the foregoing compaction policy
𝐾. Therefore, Area 2 in Figure 5 represents the overall additional cost of flexible transition, which is
𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑏𝑙𝑒 =𝑓𝐶(1−𝑥)(𝐾−𝐾′)𝛾
𝐸(1−𝛾)(3)
Overall Comparison. Table 2 summarizes the additional cost of different transition methods. It is
obvious that the additional cost of lazy transition is always larger than flexible transition. For
comparison between flexible transition and greedy transition, it is obvious that greedy transition is
always more costly when 𝐾<𝐾′because the additional cost of a flexible transition is zero in this
case. When 𝐾>𝐾′, by removing the constant coefficients in cost functions (Equations 2, 3), the
additional costs of a flexible transition and a greedy transition are 𝑂(𝑓𝐶
𝐸)and𝑂(𝐶
𝐵), respectively.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:11
Note that the FPR 𝑓in an LSM-tree is often less than 1%, and the entry size 𝐸is usually in the
same magnitude as the disk page size 𝐵. Therefore, the cost of a flexible transition can be up to two
orders of magnitude smaller than that of a greedy transition.
We give an example in real scenarios for ease of comparison. We let 𝑥=1/2and𝛾=1/2since𝑥
and𝛾are both distributed between 0and 1. We follow the common settings in key-value stores and
set𝑇=10,𝐵=4096,𝐸=1024,𝐶=1024000 , and𝑓=0.01. Finally, setting 𝐾=5and𝐾′=4gives
us𝑇𝐶(1−𝑥)
2𝐵𝐾=125,𝑓𝐶(1−𝑥2)(𝐾−𝐾′)𝛾
2𝐸(1−𝛾)=3.75, and𝑓𝐶(𝑥−𝑥2)(𝐾−𝐾′)𝛾
𝐸(1−𝛾)=2.5. Hence, a flexible transition
incurs a much smaller additional cost under this scenario.
Furthermore, if we consider the overall benefit that takes into account both additional costs
and additional benefits, flexible transition in general still has a greater benefit than that of lazy
transition, assuming that a newly learned policy outperforms the previous one in terms of current
workload and has lower latency. Since flexible transition does not involve any delay compared to
lazy transition, it allows for a prompt transformation to the new and improved policy, leading to
earlier benefits.
5LERP : THE TUNING MODEL IN RUSKEY
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a machine learning paradigm that trains an agent to cognize and
decipher its environment. The agent gets reward or penalty for each action it takes, and decides
the next action based on previous experience. The goal of RL is to improve an agent’s performance
by learning the optimal policy that maximizes the expected cumulative reward.
It is not a trivial task to design a suitable RL model for tuning an LSM-tree-based key-value
system. First, it remains unexplored how to relate the key-value system properties such as LSM-tree
compaction policy, the running time cost, the level properties, and the workload characteristics to
the fundamental RL elements such as states, actions, and rewards. The model should also avoid
over-amplifying the action space and state space. Second, to make RusKey work in an online manner
under dynamic workloads, the model should converge fast. Unfortunately, the high data volume in
key-value systems makes the deeper LSM-tree levels experience much longer time to be affected.
As a result, the corresponding feedback to the RL model is significantly delayed. Considering that
RL requires sufficient feedback from the actual environment to adjust its policy, efficiently and
effectively learning the policy for larger levels is notorious challenging. To address the challenge,
we design a novel Level-based Reinforcement learning model with policy Propagation, abbreviated
asLerp . Next, we introduce the level-based model of Lerp in Section 5.1, and policy propagation
techniques in Section 5.2.
5.1 The Level-based Model
We model the reward ,state,environment , and action to capture the system process, and then apply
a RL procedure.
5.1.1 State and Environment. The state captures the parameters related to the FLSM-tree and the
workload within a mission. Our model state consists of internal statistics of the LSM-tree, such
as the number of read and write I/Os, the level capacities, and the current compaction policies at
each level. It also includes workload statistics such as the read/write ratio in the previous mission.
These statistics effectively capture the system state which is related to the system performance. We
model the environment by the compaction policy of a level. For Level 𝑖, its compaction policy 𝐾𝑖is
defined as the maximum number of sorted runs in the level, and obviously 𝐾𝑖needs to be in[1,𝑇].
A smaller𝐾𝑖means a more aggressive compaction policy. Particularly, 𝐾𝑖=1implies a leveling
compaction policy, and 𝐾𝑖=𝑇implies a tiering compaction policy.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:12 Dingheng Mo et al.
5.1.2 Action Space: From 𝑂(2𝐿)to𝑂(𝐿).The Action changes the compaction policy of an FLSM-
tree . A compaction policy setting of an 𝐿-level FLSM-tree is a list(𝐾1,𝐾2,...,𝐾𝐿), where𝐾𝑖refers
to the policy of Level 𝑖. Intuitively, an action can change a policy setting V=(𝐾1,𝐾2,...,𝐾𝐿)to
another V′=(𝐾′
1,𝐾′
2,...,𝐾′
𝐿), giving a massive action space of size 𝑂(𝑇𝐿), where𝑇indicates the
number of policies in a level. To reduce the action space, our main idea is two-fold. First, the
compaction policy is independent among levels, and hence the training can be done separately for
each level. Second, the characteristics of real-world workloads often change gradually over time.
This hints that the policy should also be roughly continuous , and a drastic change of the policy may
not be preferred.
Therefore, we design a level-based model that trains an independent RL model for each level,
where the reward, state, and action are only tailored to the corresponding level. Such level-decoupled
models have drastically smaller action and state space, and hence easier to train. To explain, the
action space in the model at each level (or level model) is only 𝑂(𝑇), and the total action space is
𝑂(𝑇𝐿). Furthermore, we only allow continuous change of the policy in level models, i.e., the next
action for policy 𝐾𝑖can only be one of 𝐾𝑖−1,𝐾𝑖, or𝐾𝑖+1. This further reduces the action space to
𝑂(𝐿).
5.1.3 Reward. In RL, the reward function provides feedback from the environment indicating the
correctness of the actions that have been taken. In RusKey , the reward function is obliged to reflect
the performance of an FLSM-tree level. Our reward function combines both the end-to-end system
latency and a specific level-based latency. The former reflects the global impact while the latter
reflects the local impact. Let 𝑡𝑖denote the level-based latency of the 𝑖-th level and 𝑡′denote the
end-to-end latency of FLSM-tree .Lerp ’s reward function on Level 𝑖is𝛼·𝑡𝑖+(1−𝛼)·𝑡′. Where𝛼
is a parameter between 0 and 1, which controls the weight of 𝑡𝑖and𝑡′. We do not deliberately set
different weights to read latency and write latency, because the relative speed of reads and writes
is reflected in the reward (end-to-end latency), and automatically learnt in RL.
5.1.4 Incorporating Actor-Critic Network. With the fundamental mapping between the major RL
elements and FLSM-tree , we now discuss the specific design of the RL model. Note that our
level-based design can be applied with different RL models, and we select the Deep Deterministic
Policy Gradient (DDPG) model [ 34], which has been shown to be more effective compared with
the classic models such as DQN [41].
DDPG integrates DQN with the actor-critic network from DPG (Deterministic Policy Gradient).
The actor-critic network can be regarded as a temporal difference variation of the policy gradient.
It parameterizes a critic function and an actor function with neural networks. The critic function
maps the current state and action taken into a Q-Value, which is an estimation of the expected
reward. The actor function maps the state into a probabilistic distribution of available actions along
the direction suggested by the critic function. The policy gradient technique is the foundation for
the actor’s learning. Comparatively, critics assess the actor’s performance by computing the value
function. We refer interested readers to the original paper [34] for more details of the model.
Under the Lerp model, actors are in charge of selecting the best compaction strategy, and critics
assist in assessing the effectiveness of a compaction strategy. In addition, each level has its own
actor and critic functions with the level-based setting. Based on this idea, it is natural to have
DDPG-based training steps for each level, while we take the level state of the previous round as
input.
5.2 Optimize Training with Policy Propagation
The training data of the RL model comes from system runtime metrics. For larger levels in the
FLSM-tree , training data is sparse because the compaction in a deeper level is exponentially less
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:13
frequent than at a shallower level. Nonetheless, the size of a deeper level is exponentially larger than
a shallower level and hence needs more training data. This gives rise to a crucial question: how to
effectively learn the compaction policy at a large level while keeping a fast learning convergence?
To address this issue, we present a policy propagation method based on a cost analysis. As the
query cost analysis is related to the bits-per-key at Bloom filters in each level, discussions are
divided divided into two cases:
•Case 1: Uniform Bits-Per-Key: Every level assigns the same bits-per-key to the Bloom filter.
This is the default setting in many key-value stores such as RocksDB [21].
•Case 2: Monkey Allocation: Level𝑖assigns exponentially lower bits-per-key than Level 𝑖+1.
It is shown in [ 16] that this scheme achieves better amortized read performance, and has been
adopted in other advanced systems such as Dostoevisky [17] and Cosine [12].
5.2.1 Propagation for Case 1. In this case, the read/write cost ratio is very similar across different
levels, for the reason that each level has the same read amplification and write amplification.
Therefore, we can use the RL model to learn the policy of Level 1and propagate the policy to the
other levels. Specifically, we employ the per-level model to obtain the optimal policy at Level 1. The
compaction policies of other levels remain unchanged throughout this process so as not to interfere
with the end-to-end latency which contributes to the reward. Then, we transform the compaction
policies at all other levels into the policy we learned at Level 1 with the flexible transition. It should
be noted that our previous comments about the potential for independent policy settings at each
level still stand. Our earlier mention of independence referred specifically to the design space of the
LSM-tree and did not necessarily contradict the possibility of level correlation within an optimal
scheme.
5.2.2 Propagation for Case 2. In this case, the read/write cost ratio can be drastically different, and
hence the policy at each level can vary. Under the Monkey scheme, if we intend to optimize the
expected cost of an operation (lookup or update), there is an optimal policy. We mainly focus on
analyzing the zero-result case following Dostoevsky [ 17]. We apply the following lemma to guide
us in making appropriate inferences on compaction policies.
Lemma 5.1. Consider that the three consecutive levels ( 𝑖−1,𝑖,𝑖+1) in a FLSM-tree employ the
Monkey scheme. Let 𝐾∗
𝑖be the optimal merge policy that minimizes the expected cost per operation at
Level𝑖. We have the following equation:
1
𝐾∗
𝑖+1=√︄
1
𝐾∗2
𝑖+𝑇·1
𝐾∗2
𝑖−1
𝐾∗2
𝑖−1
(4)
Proof. We follow the notations in Section 4.3 (e.g., 𝐾𝑖,𝐵,𝐸,𝛾) unless otherwise specified.
(1)Lookup cost. Let𝑓𝑖denote the FPR of the Bloom filters in Level 𝑖. In expectation, the lookup
will incur𝑓𝑖·𝐾𝑖false positives in Level 𝑖in the zero-result case. As each false positive causes one
disk page read, the time cost that a lookup causes in Level 𝑖is𝑓𝑖·𝐼𝑟·𝐾𝑖, where𝐼𝑟is the average
time of a read I/O. Let 𝑐𝑟be the cost of probing the metadata of a sorted run in the main memory.
Then, the total lookup cost in Level 𝑖is𝑓𝑖·𝐼𝑟·𝐾𝑖+𝑐𝑟·𝐾𝑖.
(2)Update cost. Let𝐼𝑤denote the average time cost of a write I/O. According to [ 27], the write
amplification of Level 𝑖is𝑇/𝐾𝑖, signaling that on average the key-value entry of the update will
take part in 𝑇/𝐾𝑖compactions in Level 𝑖. This entry is read into memory and written into the disk
once at each compaction. Therefore, the update incurs an overhead of𝑇·𝐸
𝐵·𝐾𝑖·(𝐼𝑟+𝐼𝑤)+𝑇
𝐾𝑖·𝑐𝑤,
where𝑐𝑤is the CPU cost a key incurs in compaction (such as merge sorting and space allocation).
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:14 Dingheng Mo et al.
Then, the expected time overhead per operation in Level 𝑖is
𝑓𝑖·𝐼𝑟·𝐾𝑖·𝛾
|          {z          }
Query I/O cost+𝑐𝑟·𝐾𝑖·𝛾
|      {z      }
Query CPU cost+𝑇·𝐸
𝐵·𝐾𝑖·(𝐼𝑟+𝐼𝑤)·( 1−𝛾)
|                              {z                              }
Update I/O cost+𝑇
𝐾𝑖·𝑐𝑤·(1−𝛾)
|                 {z                 }
Update CPU cost(5)
Monkey requires 𝑓𝑖=𝑇𝑖−1𝑓1, where𝑓1is the FPR of the Bloom filters at the first level. Applying
the method of Lagrange multipliers, the time overhead is minimized when
𝐾∗2
𝑖=𝑇·𝐸·(𝐼𝑟+𝐼𝑤)·(1−𝛾)+𝐵·𝑇·𝑐𝑤·(1−𝛾)
𝐵·𝑓1·𝐼𝑟·𝑇𝑖−1·𝛾+𝐵·𝑐𝑟·𝛾
Or equivalently,
𝐾∗2
𝑖=𝑋
𝑌·𝑇𝑖−1+𝑍
where𝑋=𝑇·𝐸·(𝐼𝑟+𝐼𝑤)·(1−𝛾)+𝑇·𝐵·𝑐𝑤·(1−𝛾),𝑌=𝐵·𝑓1·𝐼𝑟·𝛾, and𝑍=𝐵·𝑐𝑟·𝛾. This
further gives
1
𝐾∗2
𝑖+1−1
𝐾∗2
𝑖=𝑌·(𝑇𝑖−𝑇𝑖−1)
𝑋=𝑇·𝑌·(𝑇𝑖−1−𝑇𝑖−2)
𝑋=𝑇· 
1
𝐾∗2
𝑖−1
𝐾∗2
𝑖−1!
,
Note that under the Monkey scheme, the optimal policies always satisfy that 𝐾∗
𝑖≤𝐾∗
𝑖−1, and hence
1
𝐾∗
𝑖+1=√︄
1
𝐾∗2
𝑖+𝑇·1
𝐾∗2
𝑖−1
𝐾∗2
𝑖−1
□
Lemma 5.1 shows that the optimal policy of two consecutive levels can help us infer the optimal
compaction policy of larger levels even if we are unaware of the specific values of the system
related parameters 𝑋,𝑌, and𝑍. Therefore, we let the tuning model only tune the compaction policy
of Level 1 and Level 2, and infer the compaction policy for all subsequent levels by Lemma 5.1.
When the inferred policy may not be integers, we round it to the closest valid policy.
Example. We assume that the tuning result of Level 1 and Level 2 are 9 and 7, respectively. Then
following Equation 4, we set the compaction policy of Level 3 as 𝐾∗
3=√︂
1
1
72+10·
1
72−1
92≈3. Similarly,
Level 4 has𝐾∗
4=√︂
1
1
32+10·
1
32−1
72≈1.
Additional discussion with non-zero-result lookups. The policy propagation still largely
remains viable in the presence of non-zero-result lookups. Firstly, according to previous works [ 12,
26], the hit rate of non-zero-result lookups for each level is in general proportional to the level
capacity, which increases exponentially by a factor of 𝑇from the smallest to the largest levels.
Consequently, the hit rates for all levels, except the largest level, are relatively insignificant, resulting
in a negligible impact on Bloom filters and the trade-off between reads and writes in these levels.
Hence, our policy propagation remains applicable in these levels. Secondly, under the Monkey
scheme, the FPR of the Bloom filter increases exponentially by a factor of 𝑇for each level. As
a result, the largest level has an immense FPR, which necessitates an aggressive optimal policy
(𝐾=1) to remedy excessive read overhead. For instance, in our case study presented in Figure 9,
the optimal policy for the largest layer is 𝐾=1. Even if non-zero-result lookups may partially
mitigate the influence of the Bloom filter in the largest level, the need for an aggressive optimal
policy very likely remains unchanged.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:15
6 RELATED WORK
Machine Learning for Database Storage Systems. There are extensive studies on tuning storage
systems via machine learning. Pavlo et al. [43] and Aken et al. [56] propose the concept of a self-
driving database that makes decisions automatically with machine learning models. Ottertune [ 55]
includes the techniques that analyze and flit database knobs with machine learning techniques
and further recommend parameter settings by learning from collected metrics. Qtune [ 32], CDB-
Tune [ 64], and CDBTune+ [ 65] are RL-based database tuning methods, which adopt DDPG to
improve their learning effectiveness in large configuration space. Bourbon [ 15] also incorporates
machine learning into the LSM-tree, however, in a different way from our paper. It proposes to
augment the fence pointers in the LSM-tree with the learned index structures [ 30]. We note that
most of the studies are concentrated on tuning SQL databases. To the best of our knowledge, we
have the first attempt on applying machine learning to NoSQL key-value database tuning.
LSM-tree Optimization There are numerous studies on LSM-tree optimizations [ 1–3,7–9,11,12,
16–20,23,25–29,36–39,45–50,53,54,57–60,63,66–68], as we summarized in Section 1. Among
these studies, some studies [ 12,16–18,26,27] are more related to RusKey , since they focus on
tuning compaction policies as well as RusKey . Monkey [ 16] includes a theoretical cost model for
an LSM-tree by estimating the expected I/O cost. Based on the model, Monkey co-tunes the merge
policy, the buffer size, and the Bloom filters’ bits-per-key to locate an optimal LSM-tree design with
the minimal I/O cost for a given workload. Dayan and Idreos [ 17] show that existing merge policies
(tiering and leveling) are not able to fully trade between read costs and write costs, therefore they
propose Fluid LSM-tree that enables hybrid compaction policies. In addition, Dostoevsky further
generalizes its theoretical model on hybrid compaction policies. Chatterjee et al. [12] propose a
synthetic model named Cosine for key-value stores on the cloud. Moreover, they present an I/O
cost model that is aware of workload distribution. Huynh et al. [26] provide a model-based analysis
on workloads with uncertainty. Dayan and Idreos [ 18] devise a more scalable merge policy for
LSM-tree by adjusting the size ratio between adjacency levels. Compared with these works, our
study is the first one that employs machine learning techniques and is a pioneer work that considers
real-time transition costs between different tuning settings.
7 EVALUATION
This section presents experimental studies of RusKey on various workloads. The result shows that
RusKey exhibits strong robustness in performance across different workloads.
Setup. We process our experiments on a server with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6326 CPU @ 2.90GHz
processor, 256GB DDR4 main memory, and 1TB NVMe SSD, running 64-bit Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS on
an ext4 partition.
Implementation. We implement RusKey ’sFLSM-tree on top of Facebook’s RocksDB [ 21], a
widely used LSM tree-based key-value storage system. Similar to previous works [ 12,17,18], we
extend the compactor API which RocksDB provides to allow hybrid compaction policies across
levels. We also implement Monkey [ 16] by enabling RocksDB to assign different bits-per-keys of
the Bloom filters across all levels. Following previous works [ 17,26], we enable direct I/Os for
read and write. We set the memory buffer size to 2MB, the size ratio to 10, and the default Bloom
filter bits-per-key to 8. For RocksDB with Monkey scheme, we lower bits-per-key to 4 since in
this case Monkey exploits Bloom filters more effectively. We use the internal counters of RocksDB
to acquire necessary statistics for states and measure the level-based latency. We implement the
Lerp model with PyTorch. In our experiments, we employ a three-layer fully-connected neural
network with 128 neurons per layer using ReLU activation functions for both critic and actor. We
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:16 Dingheng Mo et al.
let the end-to-end latency and by-level latency to be equally contributed to the reward by setting
parameter𝛼to1/2.
Our previous discussions are based on the assumption that the compaction is conducted per
level at a time, in line with many previous works [ 16–18,26]. In RocksDB, however, compaction is
performed at the granularity of files. A sorted run in these systems is composed of a few disk files.
During compaction, a small set of files with overlapping key ranges in each level are merged. File
compaction may reduce the actual size of a sealed run, which will be reactivated, and ultimately
leads to multiple active runs in one level. Although the compaction granularity is different, a similar
transition method can still be applied. To increase the compaction policy 𝐾𝑖of Level𝑖by one, we
reduce the capacity of all existing runs in the level from𝐶𝑖
𝐾𝑖to𝐶𝑖
𝐾𝑖+1, where𝐶𝑖is the level capacity
of Level𝑖, and initialize an empty run as the active run with the same capacity. To decrease 𝐾𝑖by
one, we seal one of the runs in the level and increase the capacity of other sequences from𝐶𝑖
𝐾𝑖to
𝐶𝑖
𝐾𝑖−1. To avoid an additional cost and a performance slump, the sealed run does not trigger any
compaction. When other runs in the level trigger a file compaction, overlapping files in the sealed
run will also be involved in this compaction. Therefore, the sealed run would gradually get merged
through compactions triggered by other runs in the level. In this way, a FLSM-tree transition still
takes effect immediately and incurs zero immediate transition cost.
Baselines. We compare RusKey with three typical compaction policy settings in Fluid LSM-
tree [ 17], including aggressive compaction ( 𝐾=1), lazy compaction ( 𝐾=10), and moderate setting
(𝐾=5). We name them as Aggressive ,Lazy andModerate , respectively. We also compare RusKey
with the state-of-the-art hybrid compaction policy Lazy-Leveling . For fairness, we only compare
Lazy-Leveling under Monkey scheme, following the setting of Dostoevisky [17]. In addition, we
also include heuristic-based baselines on top of our FLSM-tree , which greedily selects a more read
or write friendly compaction policy for each level if the workload in the level moves towards the
respective direction.
Experiment Design. By default, we initially bulk load the empty database with 100 million random
sampled key-value entries. Each key-value entry consists of a key of 128 bytes and a value of 896
bytes. The mission size is set to 50000 operations. The setting is determined to ensure a reasonably
consistent workload throughout a mission, while also involving sufficient operations in a mission
to gather the necessary information for reinforcement learning. We measure the performance
of the database with workloads of 100 million operations, which are divided into 2000 missions.
Each operation can be lookup orupdate , which consists of uniformly and randomly distributed
keys and values. Our evaluations are performed with various ratios between lookups and updates.
ForRusKey , we initiate the FLSM-tree with leveling, which is the default compaction policy in
RocksDB.
We evaluate RusKey under both the uniform Bloom filter scheme and the Monkey Bloom filter
scheme. In virtue of policy propagation, we only need to tune the compaction policy Level 1 under
the uniform scheme and propagate it to other larger levels. Under the Monkey scheme, we tune
Level 1 and Level 2 successively with the Lerp . When the compaction policies of Level 1 and Level
2 stay stable and the RL model converges, we finish the tuning and transfer the policy to larger
levels with Equation 4.
RusKey self-navigates to optimal design on static workloads. In Figure 6, we compare the
performance of RusKey with the baselines under various workloads, which include read-heavy
workload with 90% lookups, write-heavy workload with 10% lookups, and read-write-balanced
workload with 50% lookups. Each of these workloads includes 100 million operations which are
divided into 2000 missions.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:17
 0 2 4 6 8 10 Compaction policy of Ruskey
 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12
 0  500  1000  1500  2000Latency per Query (ms)
The Number of Missions
(a) Read-heavy
 0 2 4 6 8 10
Compaction policy of Ruskey
 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2
 0  500  1000  1500  2000Latency per Query (ms)
The Number of Missions (b) Write-heavy
 0 2 4 6 8 10 Compaction policy of Ruskey
 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1 0.11
 0  500  1000  1500  2000Latency per Query (ms)
The Number of Missions (c) Balanced
Fig. 6. RusKey self-navigates to the optimal design on static workloads.
The result shows that RusKey achieves near-optimal performance across all workloads. In
contrast, the baselines perform sub-optimally on at least one workload. For example, in the read-
heavy workload (Figure 6 (a)), Aggressive is the most effective because it maintains a low read
cost by merging sorted runs aggressively that promises low read amplification. However, its
performance degrades with the write-heavy workload (Figure 6 (b)) because the aggressive merging
incurs significant additional write amplification. Moderate achieves moderate performance on
each of the workloads. It performs worse than aggressive policy on the read-heavy workload and
worse than lazy policy on the write-heavy workload. Meanwhile, its performance is relatively better
than the other two baselines on the balanced workload. To explain, the balanced workload contains
an equal quantity of lookups and updates. Aggressive andLazy are respectively much slower on
update and lookup operations. In contrast, Moderate processes both lookups and updates with
reasonable efficiency. Nevertheless, the end-to-end performance of moderate policy is still lower
than RusKey on the balanced workload when RusKey finishes the tuning and reaches a sweet
trade-off between lookups and updates.
Overall, RusKey has robust performance across different workloads as it can adjust its compaction
policies to accommodate different workload compositions. The sub-figures at the top of Figure 6
show the compaction policy of RusKey tuned by the RL model Lerp during workload processing.
Through tracking the tuning strategy of Lerp , we find that Lerp selects an aggressive compaction
policy with a read-heavy workload and a lazy compaction policy with a write-heavy workload.
In addition, as shown in Figure 6 (c), Lerp selects an intermediate policy 𝐾=4on the balanced
workload, which dominates all baselines after around 600 missions. This is because the baselines
are sub-optimal on the balanced workload while RusKey self-drives to the optimal compaction
policy through the Lerp model. This wise strategy is enabled by integrating the FLSM-tree with
the deep RL model Lerp . Note that there are still minor gaps between RusKey and the respective
optimal baselines on read-heavy and write-heavy workloads because RusKey requires a small
number of missions to conduct the online training in order to find the optimal compaction policy.
As shown in the upper sub-figures of Figure 6, it takes Lerp around 300 missions to explore and
navigate to the optimal setting with the read-heavy and write-heavy workloads. Tuning on the
balanced workload takes longer, which is around 600 missions.
RusKey performs better on dynamic workloads. In this experiment, we evaluate RusKey and
the baselines with a comprehensive dynamic workload. The workload is divided into five sessions
with different proportions of lookups and updates. They are in the order of read-heavy (10% update),
balanced (50% update), write-heavy (90% update), write-inclined (70% update), and read-inclined
(30% update). Each section includes 50 million operations which are divided into 1000 missions
with 50000 operations for each.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:18 Dingheng Mo et al.
Read-heavy Balanced Write-heavy Write-inclined Read-inclined 
The Number of Missions 
Fig. 7. RusKey outperforms other baselines on dynamic workloads through self-tuning and transforming its
compaction policy according to the change of workload.
MethodPerformance RankingAvg. RankingRead-H Balanced Write-H Write-I Read-I
K=1 1 4 4 4 1 2.8
K=5 3 2 3 1 3 2.4
K=10 4 3 1 3 4 3
RusKey 1 1 1 1 2 1.2
Table 3. RusKey ranks higher in performance on average. “H” stands for “heavy” and “I” stands for “inclined”.
Figure 7 presents the latency of RusKey and the baselines as well as the compaction policy that
RusKey chooses. All baselines perform sub-optimally on at least one of the sessions. In the meantime,
the latency of RusKey is close-to-optimal across all sessions, benefiting from a successful tuning
through Lerp andFLSM-tree ’s ability to flexibly transform the compaction policy. Specifically,
RusKey adopts compaction policy settings of 𝐾=1,𝐾=5,𝐾=10,𝐾=6,𝐾=2on the read-heavy,
balanced, write-heavy, write-incline and read-inclined sessions, respectively.
Across all workload sessions, RusKey achieves up to 4 times better performance than Aggressive
(on the write-heavy session), up to 2.4 times better performance than Moderate (on the read-heavy
session), and up to 3.5 times better performance than Lazy (on the read-heavy session). Note that
in Figure 7, the latency of RusKey rises slightly at the beginning of each workload session and
then drops rapidly. The reason behind this is that Lerp requires a short retraining under a new
workload setting.
To further show the robustness of RusKey , we compute the performance ranking of all methods
across all five workload sessions after tuning RusKey , which is summarized in Table 3. The
performance is compared by the average time cost per operation after the RL model is converged in
each session. The result demonstrates that RusKey ranks first for four workloads and ranks second
for the remaining one. Overall, it achieves a high average ranking of 1.2, demonstrating the strong
robustness of RusKey .
RusKey is effective under the Monkey scheme. In Figure 8, we compare RusKey with the
baselines under the Monkey scheme, with the same workload setting as Figure 6. In addition to the
three basic baselines, we also compare with Lazy-Leveling [17], which is one of the state-of-the-art
compaction policies designed for the Monkey scheme. The result is similar to Figure 6, showing
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:19
 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08
 0  500  1000  1500  2000Latency per Query (ms)
The Number of Missions
(a) Read-heavy
 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25
 0  500  1000  1500  2000Latency per Query (ms)
The Number of Missions (b) Write-heavy
 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16
 0  500  1000  1500  2000Latency per Query (ms)
The Number of Missions (c) Balanced
Fig. 8. RusKey is effective under the Monkey scheme.
Fig. 9. RusKey adopts novel policy settings compared with previous designs.
that RusKey achieves near-optimal performance across various workloads under the Monkey
scheme as well. Moreover, Lazy-Leveling also reaches near-optimal across all workloads, whereas
RusKey performs better than Lazy-Leveling on every workload. Specifically, RusKey performs
significantly better than Lazy-Leveling and other baselines on the balanced workload. The reason
is that RusKey is able to adopt novel policy settings through policy propagation. We will explain
this in detail with a subsequent experiment.
RusKey adopts novel policy settings compared with previous designs. We compare the
compaction policy setting of RusKey and the state-of-the-art design Lazy-Leveling under the
read-write-balanced workload. The experiment is conducted on a workload of 25 million operations
under the Monkey scheme after RusKey finishes self-tuning. We report the end-to-end latency
(i.e., the running time of processing all the operations) in Figure 9 Left and the per-level latency
in Figure 9 Right. Under this case, RusKey adopts different compaction policies at each level. It
sets an aggressive policy at the first level. As the level goes deeper, the policy becomes lazier. This
matches the intuition of Lazy-Leveling , that is, compactions in smaller levels are less needed than
in smaller levels with the Monkey scheme, because the read cost is lower in smaller levels. The
superiority of RusKey is that RusKey self-tunes its compaction policy in a more elaborate way
than Lazy-Leveling and gains more benefits from this intuition.
RusKey remains effective when for YCSB workloads. We evaluate RusKey under the YCSB
standard benchmarks and report the results in Figure 11. We use the default Zipfian distribution,
in which the update frequency and access frequency of keys follow the power law. As shown in
Figure 11 (a), (b), and (c), the results on YCSB are quite similar in trends to the results on uniform
workloads, if we set the composition of workloads the same as the previous experiments. These
results further verify that RusKey delivers near-optimal performance across diverse workloads on
the YCSB benchmark. Furthermore, we evaluate YCSB benchmark with a workload that contains
50% range lookups and 50% updates, and the results are shown in Figure 11 (d). Among all baselines,
Aggressive achieves the lowest latency, and the performance of RusKey is on par with that of
Aggressive . This demonstrates that RusKey remains high effectiveness even with range lookups.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:20 Dingheng Mo et al.
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
 0  20  40  60  80  100K=1 K=10Transition
K=1 K=10TransitionMission Write Latency (s)
The Number of Missions
(a) Write latency
 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2
 0  20  40  60  80  100K=1 K=10TransitionMission Read Latency (s)
The Number of Missions (b) Read latency
Fig. 10. Flexible transition incurs no immediate transition cost and delay.
 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1 0.11 0.12 0.13 0.14 0.15
 0  500  1000  1500  2000Latency per Query (ms)
The Number of Missions
(a) Read-heavy
 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2
 0  500  1000  1500  2000Latency per Query (ms)
The Number of Missions (b) Write-heavy
 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1 0.11 0.12
 0  500  1000  1500  2000Latency per Query (ms)
The Number of Missions
(c) Balanced
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
 0  500  1000  1500  2000Latency per Query (ms)
The Number of Missions (d) Range
Fig. 11. RusKey is robust on YCSB benchmarks and can self-tune to a near-optimal policy.
Flexible transition performs better than other transition methods. In Figure 10, we evaluate
the greedy, lazy, and flexible transitions using a micro-benchmark with compaction granularity of
levels. We employ a read-write-balanced workload (50% lookups and 50% updates) of 120 missions,
while each mission contains 1 million operations. Each level’s initial compaction policy in the
FLSM-tree is 1. The compaction policy is transformed from 1 to 10 midway through the workload.
Specifically, the compaction policy transition happens at the 60th mission, which is represented by
the dotted lines in Figure 10. In Figures 10 (a) and 10 (b), the write latency and read latency for each
mission using various transition methods are depicted, respectively. The spikes of write latency
in Figures 10 (a) are caused by compactions with the level granularity. Figure 10 (a) demonstrates
that when a greedy transition occurs, it results in a very high write latency spike since changing
the compaction policies at every level necessitates compacting all data in each level to the next
level. With a greedy transition and a flexible transition, the write latency spikes brought on
by compactions are significantly lower after the policy is changed. The reason is that the new
compaction policy of 𝐾=10incurs less write amplification, so the cost of each compaction, i.e. the
spikes, would be lower. However, with a lazy transition, the height of spikes stays the same before
and after the transition, which means that the compaction policies in larger levels still remain
unchanged, because the transition is delayed until the level is completely filled. Moreover, we can
find similar results in Figures 10 (b). The read latencies of the greedy and flexible transition are
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:21
Read-heavy Balanced Write-heavy Write-inclined Read-inclined 
Method Rank
RusKey 1.2
Symmetric
ThresholdsGreedy, 50%, 50% 1.8
Greedy, 33%, 67% 1.8
Greedy, 25%, 75% 2.4
Greedy, 10%, 90% 3.2
Biased
ThresholdsGreedy, 25%, 50% 1.8
Greedy, 50%, 75% 2.4
Fig. 12. RusKey is more robust than greedy approaches with various thresholds.
 0.01 0.1 1 10
Read-heavy-U Write-heavy-U Balanced-U Read-heavy-M Write-heavy-M Balanced-MLatency per Mission (s)LSM-tree RL-model
Fig. 13. RusKey ’s model update time is relatively insignificant.
higher than that of the lazy transition after the transition happens, which also reflects the delay
of the lazy transition. In terms of the end-to-end latency, the greedy transition, lazy transition
and flexible transition use 51s, 44s, and 40s, respectively. In general, Figure 10 indicates that the
flexible transition incurs almost-free immediate transition cost and has no delay, demonstrating its
superiority.
Comparison with greedy approaches. An interesting question is whether a simple greedy policy
can effectively address our problem. To explore this possibility, we implemented a series of greedy
strategies for comparison. We utilized a per-level detector to detect the workload within a level and
set two thresholds, ℎ𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚 andℎ𝑡𝑜𝑝. If the percentage of lookups in the level is less than ℎ𝑏𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑜𝑚 ,
the greedy algorithm identifies the workload as write-heavy and increases the compaction policy
of the level by one. Conversely, if the percentage of lookups in the level exceeds ℎ𝑡𝑜𝑝, the greedy
algorithm recognizes the workload as read-heavy and decreases the compaction policy by one. We
consider a wide range of thresholds, including the symmetric thresholds and biased thresholds
shown in the right table of Figure 12, and present four settings in the left figure of Figure 12
for better visualization. The results indicate that some greedy methods can achieve the desired
performance for read-heavy or write-heavy workloads. However, for other workloads such as
balanced, read-inclined, and write-inclined workloads, they fail to reach the optimal performance. In
contrast, RusKey can self-tune to a near-optimal performance across all workloads, thus providing a
relatively more robust performance. The robustness of RusKey is attributed to its ability to capture
the intricate mapping from workload ratio to the optimal policy through a reward mechanism,
which is absent in the greedy approaches.
The right table in Figure 12 summarizes the average performance ranking of all methods, similar
to the setting of Table 3. Overall, RusKey achieves the highest average ranking, surpassing the best
setting of a greedy approach we tested. Our findings suggest that while greedy policies may be
effective in some scenarios, the use of reinforcement learning methods like RusKey may provide
more robust and comprehensive optimization for LSM-trees.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:22 Dingheng Mo et al.
The model updating time is insignificant. In Figure 13, we compare the RL model update cost
and LSM-tree operation cost per mission on various workloads. “U” and “M” refer to the uniform
Bloom filter scheme and the Monkey scheme, respectively. The Y-axis is in logarithmic scale. Our
results show that the model update cost is insignificant compared with the total cost of processing
the workload by the LSM-tree. For most workloads, the time spent on updating the model is at most
1% of the time for processing LSM-tree operations. For example, on the balanced workload with
the uniform Bloom filter scheme, the average query processing cost per mission is 3.36 seconds,
while the average model update cost is only 0.019 seconds. The small update cost of the RL model
ofRusKey is mainly attributed to the reduction of the action space.
Brute-force learning approaches can be impractical. We evaluated two brute-force training
approaches: (1) without a level-based model that reduces the action space , and (2) without the policy
propagation and train all levels. We limit the maximum experiment time to 24 hours and use the
setting of Figure 6 (c). Our results show that the first approach cannot finish learning within the
given time frame while the second approach fails to achieve the optimum policy starting from
Level 3 due to insufficient samples. This demonstrates the importance of our optimization strategy.
Limitations. Our work represents a first attempt at using reinforcement learning to optimize LSM-
trees, and as such, we have only explored one feasible solution for using machine learning to tune
LSM-trees. However, there are opportunities for further improvement of RusKey by incorporating
additional design parameters. For instance, we could learn to adjust the memory allocation for
Bloom filters by considering a more refined analysis with non-zero result workloads or adapt
size ratios based on a given workload. The challenge here is to maintain a practical action space
and a reasonable LSM-tree transition cost. Another limitation of our approach is that the flexible
transition degenerates into lazy transition in an extreme read-only case since flexible transition
only takes effect when there are updates. It is unclear whether there are better transition methods
for this scenario, and this remains an open question for future research. In summary, there is still
much to be explored regarding the optimization of LSM-trees using reinforcement learning, and
these aspects deserve further study in future works.
8 CONCLUSION
We present RusKey , which is an RL-enhanced key-value store that supports dynamic workloads in
an online manner. We integrate into RusKey a novel FLSM-tree to perform an efficient compaction
policy transformation, where a FLSM-tree improves an original LSM-tree in terms of transition
costs and delays. Further, we model the system by a level-based RL model Lerp , which applies
DDPG to each level of the FLSM-tree for effective tuning of RusKey under dynamic workloads.
Moreover, we propose a policy propagation method across levels, reducing the demand for training
samples.
9 ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is supported by NTU SUG-NAP and the Ministry of Education, Singapore, under its
AcRF Tier-2 (MOE-T2EP20122-0003). Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of the Ministry of
Education, Singapore. We thank Andrew Lim and Weiping Yu for the disucssions during the initial
phase of the research.
REFERENCES
[1]Ildar Absalyamov, Michael J Carey, and Vassilis J Tsotras. 2018. Lightweight cardinality estimation in LSM-based
systems. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data . 841–855.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:23
[2] Muhammad Yousuf Ahmad and Bettina Kemme. 2015. Compaction management in distributed key-value datastores.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 8, 8 (2015), 850–861.
[3]Wail Y Alkowaileet, Sattam Alsubaiee, and Michael J Carey. 2019. An LSM-based Tuple Compaction Framework for
Apache AsterixDB (Extended Version). arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08185 (2019).
[4]Sattam Alsubaiee, Yasser Altowim, Hotham Altwaijry, Alexander Behm, Vinayak Borkar, Yingyi Bu, Michael Carey,
Inci Cetindil, Madhusudan Cheelangi, Khurram Faraaz, et al .2014. AsterixDB: A scalable, open source BDMS. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1407.0454 (2014).
[5]Timothy G Armstrong, Vamsi Ponnekanti, Dhruba Borthakur, and Mark Callaghan. 2013. Linkbench: a database
benchmark based on the facebook social graph. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on
Management of Data . 1185–1196.
[6]Berk Atikoglu, Yuehai Xu, Eitan Frachtenberg, Song Jiang, and Mike Paleczny. 2012. Workload analysis of a large-
scale key-value store. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGMETRICS/PERFORMANCE joint international conference on
Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems . 53–64.
[7]Oana Balmau, Diego Didona, Rachid Guerraoui, Willy Zwaenepoel, Huapeng Yuan, Aashray Arora, Karan Gupta, and
Pavan Konka. 2017. TRIAD: Creating Synergies Between Memory, Disk and Log in Log Structured Key-Value Stores.
In2017 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 17) . 363–375.
[8]Oana Balmau, Florin Dinu, Willy Zwaenepoel, Karan Gupta, Ravishankar Chandhiramoorthi, and Diego Didona.
2019. SILK: Preventing Latency Spikes in Log-Structured Merge Key-Value Stores. In 2019 USENIX Annual Technical
Conference (USENIX ATC 19) . 753–766.
[9]Edward Bortnikov, Anastasia Braginsky, Eshcar Hillel, Idit Keidar, and Gali Sheffi. 2018. Accordion: Better memory
organization for LSM key-value stores. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 11, 12 (2018), 1863–1875.
[10] Zhichao Cao, Siying Dong, Sagar Vemuri, and David HC Du. 2020. Characterizing, Modeling, and Benchmarking
RocksDB Key-Value Workloads at Facebook. In 18th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 20) .
209–223.
[11] Helen HW Chan, Chieh-Jan Mike Liang, Yongkun Li, Wenjia He, Patrick PC Lee, Lianjie Zhu, Yaozu Dong, Yinlong Xu,
Yu Xu, Jin Jiang, et al. 2018. HashKV: Enabling Efficient Updates in KV Storage via Hashing. In 2018 USENIX Annual
Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 18) . 1007–1019.
[12] Subarna Chatterjee, Meena Jagadeesan, Wilson Qin, and Stratos Idreos. 2021. Cosine: a cloud-cost optimized self-
designing key-value storage engine. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 15, 1 (2021), 112–126.
[13] Source Code. 2022. WiredTiger. https://github.com/wiredtiger/wiredtiger.
[14] Carlo Curino, Evan PC Jones, Samuel Madden, and Hari Balakrishnan. 2011. Workload-aware database monitoring
and consolidation. In Proceedings of the 2011 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of data . 313–324.
[15] Yifan Dai, Yien Xu, Aishwarya Ganesan, Ramnatthan Alagappan, Brian Kroth, Andrea Arpaci-Dusseau, and Remzi
Arpaci-Dusseau. 2020. From WiscKey to Bourbon: A Learned Index for Log-Structured Merge Trees. In 14th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20) . 155–171.
[16] Niv Dayan, Manos Athanassoulis, and Stratos Idreos. 2017. Monkey: Optimal navigable key-value store. In Proceedings
of the 2017 ACM International Conference on Management of Data . 79–94.
[17] Niv Dayan and Stratos Idreos. 2018. Dostoevsky: Better Space-Time Trade-Offs for LSM-Tree Based Key-Value Stores
via Adaptive Removal of Superfluous Merging. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Management
of Data (Houston, TX, USA) (SIGMOD ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 505–520.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3183713.3196927
[18] Niv Dayan and Stratos Idreos. 2019. The log-structured merge-bush & the wacky continuum. In Proceedings of the 2019
International Conference on Management of Data . 449–466.
[19] Niv Dayan and Moshe Twitto. 2021. Chucky: A Succinct Cuckoo Filter for LSM-Tree. In Proceedings of the 2021
International Conference on Management of Data . 365–378.
[20] Niv Dayan, Tamar Weiss, Shmuel Dashevsky, Michael Pan, Edward Bortnikov, and Moshe Twitto. 2022. Spooky:
granulating LSM-tree compactions correctly. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 15, 11 (2022), 3071–3084.
[21] Facebook. 2022. RocksDB. https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb.
[22] Daniel Gmach, Jerry Rolia, Ludmila Cherkasova, and Alfons Kemper. 2007. Workload analysis and demand prediction
of enterprise data center applications. In 2007 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Workload Characterization . IEEE,
171–180.
[23] Guy Golan-Gueta, Edward Bortnikov, Eshcar Hillel, and Idit Keidar. 2015. Scaling concurrent log-structured data
stores. In Proceedings of the Tenth European Conference on Computer Systems . 1–14.
[24] Google. 2022. LevelDB. https://github.com/google/leveldb/.
[25] Gui Huang, Xuntao Cheng, Jianying Wang, Yujie Wang, Dengcheng He, Tieying Zhang, Feifei Li, Sheng Wang, Wei
Cao, and Qiang Li. 2019. X-Engine: An optimized storage engine for large-scale E-commerce transaction processing.
InProceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data . 651–665.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
213:24 Dingheng Mo et al.
[26] Andy Huynh, Harshal Chaudhari, Evimaria Terzi, and Manos Athanassoulis. 2021. Endure: A Robust Tuning Paradigm
for LSM Trees Under Workload Uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13801 (2021).
[27] Stratos Idreos, Niv Dayan, Wilson Qin, Mali Akmanalp, Sophie Hilgard, Andrew Slavin Ross, James Lennon, Varun Jain,
Harshita Gupta, David Li, and Zichen Zhu. 2019. Design Continuums and the Path Toward Self-Designing Key-Value
Stores that Know and Learn. In Proceedings of the Biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR) .
[28] Taewoo Kim, Alexander Behm, Michael Blow, Vinayak Borkar, Yingyi Bu, Michael J Carey, Murtadha Hubail, Shiva
Jahangiri, Jianfeng Jia, Chen Li, et al .2020. Robust and efficient memory management in Apache AsterixDB. Software:
Practice and Experience 50, 7 (2020), 1114–1151.
[29] Eric R Knorr, Baptiste Lemaire, Andrew Lim, Siqiang Luo, Huanchen Zhang, Stratos Idreos, and Michael Mitzenmacher.
2022. Proteus: A Self-Designing Range Filter. In Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Management of
Data . 1670–1684.
[30] Tim Kraska, Alex Beutel, Ed H Chi, Jeffrey Dean, and Neoklis Polyzotis. 2018. The case for learned index structures. In
Proceedings of the 2018 international conference on management of data . 489–504.
[31] Avinash Lakshman and Prashant Malik. 2010. Cassandra: a decentralized structured storage system. ACM SIGOPS
Operating Systems Review 44, 2 (2010), 35–40.
[32] Guoliang Li, Xuanhe Zhou, Shifu Li, and Bo Gao. 2019. QTune: A Query-Aware Database Tuning System with Deep
Reinforcement Learning. 12, 12 (Aug. 2019), 2118–2130. https://doi.org/10.14778/3352063.3352129
[33] Meng Li, Deyi Chen, Haipeng Dai, Rongbiao Xie, Siqiang Luo, Rong Gu, Tong Yang, and Guihai Chen. 2022. Seesaw
Counting Filter: An Efficient Guardian for Vulnerable Negative Keys During Dynamic Filtering. In Proceedings of the
ACM Web Conference 2022 . 2759–2767.
[34] Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan
Wierstra. 2015. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971 (2015).
[35] LinkedIn. 2022. Voldemort. http://www.project-voldemort.com.
[36] Lanyue Lu, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Hariharan Gopalakrishnan, Andrea C Arpaci-Dusseau, and Remzi H
Arpaci-Dusseau. 2017. Wisckey: Separating keys from values in ssd-conscious storage. ACM Transactions on Storage
(TOS) 13, 1 (2017), 1–28.
[37] Chen Luo and Michael J Carey. 2019. On performance stability in LSM-based storage systems (extended version).
arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.09667 (2019).
[38] Chen Luo and Michael J Carey. 2020. Breaking down memory walls: adaptive memory management in LSM-based
storage systems. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 14, 3 (2020), 241–254.
[39] Siqiang Luo, Subarna Chatterjee, Rafael Ketsetsidis, Niv Dayan, Wilson Qin, and Stratos Idreos. 2020. Rosetta: A robust
space-time optimized range filter for key-value stores. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGMOD International Conference
on Management of Data . 2071–2086.
[40] Lin Ma, Dana Van Aken, Ahmed Hefny, Gustavo Mezerhane, Andrew Pavlo, and Geoffrey J Gordon. 2018. Query-based
workload forecasting for self-driving database management systems. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference
on Management of Data . 631–645.
[41] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra, and Martin
Riedmiller. 2013. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602 (2013).
[42] Patrick O’Neil, Edward Cheng, Dieter Gawlick, and Elizabeth O’Neil. 1996. The log-structured merge-tree (LSM-tree).
Acta Informatica 33, 4 (1996), 351–385.
[43] Andrew Pavlo, Gustavo Angulo, Joy Arulraj, Haibin Lin, Jiexi Lin, Lin Ma, Prashanth Menon, Todd C Mowry, Matthew
Perron, Ian Quah, et al .2017. Self-Driving Database Management Systems.. In Proceedings of the Biennial Conference
on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR) , Vol. 4. 1.
[44] Mohiuddin Abdul Qader, Shiwen Cheng, and Vagelis Hristidis. 2018. A comparative study of secondary indexing
techniques in LSM-based NoSQL databases. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data .
551–566.
[45] Pandian Raju, Rohan Kadekodi, Vijay Chidambaram, and Ittai Abraham. 2017. Pebblesdb: Building key-value stores
using fragmented log-structured merge trees. In Proceedings of the 26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles .
497–514.
[46] Kai Ren, Qing Zheng, Joy Arulraj, and Garth Gibson. 2017. SlimDB: A space-efficient key-value storage engine for
semi-sorted data. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 10, 13 (2017), 2037–2048.
[47] Subhadeep Sarkar, Tarikul Islam Papon, Dimitris Staratzis, and Manos Athanassoulis. 2020. Lethe: A tunable delete-
aware LSM engine. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data . 893–908.
[48] Subhadeep Sarkar, Dimitris Staratzis, Zichen Zhu, and Manos Athanassoulis. 2022. Constructing and analyzing the
LSM compaction design space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04522 (2022).
[49] Russell Sears and Raghu Ramakrishnan. 2012. bLSM: a general purpose log structured merge tree. In Proceedings of the
2012 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data . 217–228.
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
Learning to Optimize LSM-trees: Towards A Reinforcement
Learning based Key-Value Store for Dynamic Workloads 213:25
[50] Pradeep J Shetty, Richard P Spillane, Ravikant R Malpani, Binesh Andrews, Justin Seyster, and Erez Zadok. 2013.
Building Workload-Independent Storage with VT-Trees. In 11th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies
(FAST 13) . 17–30.
[51] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. 2018. Reinforcement learning: An introduction . MIT press.
[52] Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. 1998. Introduction to reinforcement learning. (1998).
[53] Yu, Geoffrey X and Markakis, Markos and Kipf, Andreas and Larson, Per-Åke and Minhas, Umar Farooq and Kraska,
Tim. 2022. TreeLine: an update-in-place key-value store for modern storage. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 16, 1
(2022), 99–112.
[54] Risi Thonangi and Jun Yang. 2017. On log-structured merge for solid-state drives. In 2017 IEEE 33rd International
Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) . IEEE, 683–694.
[55] Dana Van Aken, Andrew Pavlo, Geoffrey J Gordon, and Bohan Zhang. 2017. Automatic database management system
tuning through large-scale machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM international conference on management
of data . 1009–1024.
[56] Dana Van Aken, Dongsheng Yang, Sebastien Brillard, Ari Fiorino, Bohan Zhang, Christian Bilien, and Andrew Pavlo.
2021. An inquiry into machine learning-based automatic configuration tuning services on real-world database
management systems. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 14, 7 (2021), 1241–1253.
[57] Tobias Vinçon, Sergej Hardock, Christian Riegger, Julian Oppermann, Andreas Koch, and Ilia Petrov. 2018. Noftl-kv:
Tackling write-amplification on kv-stores with native storage management. In Advances in database technology-EDBT
2018: 21st International Conference on Extending Database Technology, Vienna, Austria, March 26-29, 2018. proceedings .
University of Konstanz, University Library, 457–460.
[58] Peng Wang, Guangyu Sun, Song Jiang, Jian Ouyang, Shiding Lin, Chen Zhang, and Jason Cong. 2014. An efficient
design and implementation of LSM-tree based key-value store on open-channel SSD. In Proceedings of the Ninth
European Conference on Computer Systems . 1–14.
[59] Xingbo Wu, Yuehai Xu, Zili Shao, and Song Jiang. 2015. LSM-trie: An LSM-tree-based Ultra-Large Key-Value Store for
Small Data Items. In 2015 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 15) . 71–82.
[60] Lei Yang, Hong Wu, Tieying Zhang, Xuntao Cheng, Feifei Li, Lei Zou, Yujie Wang, Rongyao Chen, Jianying Wang, and
Gui Huang. 2020. Leaper: A learned prefetcher for cache invalidation in LSM-tree based storage engines. Proceedings
of the VLDB Endowment 13, 12 (2020), 1976–1989.
[61] Ting Yao, Jiguang Wan, Ping Huang, Xubin He, Qingxin Gui, Fei Wu, and Changsheng Xie. 2017. A light-weight
compaction tree to reduce I/O amplification toward efficient key-value stores. In Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Massive Storage
Syst. Technol.(MSST) . 1–13.
[62] Ting Yao, Jiguang Wan, Ping Huang, Xubin He, Fei Wu, and Changsheng Xie. 2017. Building efficient key-value stores
via a lightweight compaction tree. ACM Transactions on Storage (TOS) 13, 4 (2017), 1–28.
[63] Huanchen Zhang, Hyeontaek Lim, Viktor Leis, David G Andersen, Michael Kaminsky, Kimberly Keeton, and Andrew
Pavlo. 2018. SuRF: Practical range query filtering with fast succinct tries. In Proceedings of the 2018 International
Conference on Management of Data . 323–336.
[64] Ji Zhang, Yu Liu, Ke Zhou, Guoliang Li, Zhili Xiao, Bin Cheng, Jiashu Xing, Yangtao Wang, Tianheng Cheng, Li Liu,
et al.2019. An end-to-end automatic cloud database tuning system using deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
of the 2019 International Conference on Management of Data . 415–432.
[65] Ji Zhang, Ke Zhou, Guoliang Li, Yu Liu, Ming Xie, Bin Cheng, and Jiashu Xing. 2021. CDBTune+: An efficient deep
reinforcement learning-based automatic cloud database tuning system. The VLDB Journal 30, 6 (2021), 959–987.
[66] Teng Zhang, Jianying Wang, Xuntao Cheng, Hao Xu, Nanlong Yu, Gui Huang, Tieying Zhang, Dengcheng He, Feifei
Li, Wei Cao, et al .2020. FPGA-Accelerated Compactions for LSM-based Key-Value Store. In 18th USENIX Conference on
File and Storage Technologies (FAST 20) . 225–237.
[67] Yueming Zhang, Yongkun Li, Fan Guo, Cheng Li, and Yinlong Xu. 2018. ElasticBF: Fine-grained and Elastic Bloom
Filter Towards Efficient Read for LSM-tree-based KV Stores. In 10th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Storage and File
Systems (HotStorage 18) .
[68] Zichen Zhu, Ju Hyoung Mun, Aneesh Raman, and Manos Athanassoulis. 2021. Reducing bloom filter cpu overhead in
lsm-trees on modern storage devices. In Proceedings of the 17th International Workshop on Data Management on New
Hardware (DaMoN 2021) . 1–10.
Received January 2023; revised April 2023; accepted May 2023
Proc. ACM Manag. Data, Vol. 1, No. 3 (SIGMOD), Article 213. Publication date: September 2023.
